[FLINK-20300] Add Flink 1.12 release notes (#14195)
apache/flink: docs/release-notes/flink-1.12.md

under the License.
-->

These release notes discuss important aspects, such as configuration, behavior,
or dependencies, that changed between Flink 1.11 and Flink 1.12. Please read
these notes carefully if you are planning to upgrade your Flink version to 1.12.

* This will be replaced by the TOC
{:toc}

### APIs

#### Remove deprecated methods in ExecutionConfig [FLINK-19084](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-19084)

Deprecated method `ExecutionConfig#isLatencyTrackingEnabled` was removed, you can use `ExecutionConfig#getLatencyTrackingInterval` instead. 

Deprecated and methods without effect were removed: `ExecutionConfig#enable/disableSysoutLogging`, `ExecutionConfig#set/isFailTaskOnCheckpointError`.

Removed `-q` flag from cli. The option had no effect. 

#### Remove deprecated RuntimeContext#getAllAccumulators [FLINK-19032](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-19032)

The deprecated method `RuntimeContext#getAllAccumulators` was removed. Please use `RuntimeContext#getAccumulator` instead. 

#### Deprecated CheckpointConfig#setPreferCheckpointForRecovery due to risk of data loss [FLINK-20441](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-20441)

> The `CheckpointConfig#setPreferCheckpointForRecovery` method has been deprecated, because using checkpoints for recovery can lead to data loss.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `CheckpointConfig#setPreferCheckpointForRecovery` method has been deprecated, because preferring  older checkpoints over newer savepoints for recovery can lead to data loss.
```

- Deprecate `StreamExecutionEnvironment.setStreamTimeCharacteristic()` and `TimeCharacteristic` [FLINK-19319](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-19319)

  In Flink 1.12 the default stream time characteristic has been changed to `EventTime`, thus you don't need to call this method for enabling event-time support anymore. Explicitly using processing-time windows and timers works in event-time mode. If you need to disable watermarks, please use `ExecutionConfig.setAutoWatermarkInterval(long)`. If you are using `IngestionTime`, please manually set an appropriate `WatermarkStrategy`. If you are using generic "time window" operations (for example `KeyedStream.timeWindow()` that change behaviour based on the time characteristic, please use equivalent operations that explicitly specify processing time or event time). 

- Remove deprecated `DataStream#split` [FLINK-19083](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-19083)

>   The `DataStream#split()` operation has been removed after being marked as deprecated for a couple of versions. Please use [Side Outputs]({% link dev/stream/side_output.md %})) instead.

Reviewer 2: Removing `split` and `fold` is not related to the `Batch` execution. It's just an API cleanup similar to removing UdfAnalyzer.

#### Remove remaining UdfAnalyzer configurations [FLINK-13857](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-13857)

The `ExecutionConfig#get/setCodeAnalysisMode` method and `SkipCodeAnalysis` class were removed. They took no effect even before that change, therefore there is no need to use any of these. 

#### Extend CompositeTypeSerializerSnapshot to allow composite serializers to signal migration based on outer configuration [FLINK-17520](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-17520)

The `boolean isOuterSnapshotCompatible(TypeSerializer)` on the `CompositeTypeSerializerSnapshot` class has been deprecated, in favor of a new `OuterSchemaCompatibility#resolveOuterSchemaCompatibility(TypeSerializer)` method. Please implement that instead. Compared to the old method, the new method allows composite serializers to signal state schema migration based on outer schema and configuration. 

#### Bump Scala Macros Version to 2.1.1 [FLINK-19278](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-19278)

Flink now relies on Scala Macros 2.1.1. This means that we no longer support Scala < 2.11.11. 

> #### Allow explicitly configuring time behaviour on CEP PatternStream [FLINK-19326](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-19326)

Reviewer 3: This could be further up there with the same notice for `KeyedStream.intervalJoin()`

Once the JobManager for that job has been created, the job is in `CREATED` state and all calls are available. 

### Runtime

#### FLIP-141: Intra-Slot Managed Memory Sharing

The configuration `python.fn-execution.buffer.memory.size` and `python.fn-execution.framework.memory.size` have been removed and so will not take effect any more. Besides, the default value of `python.fn-execution.memory.managed` has been changed to true and so managed memory will be used by default for Python workers. In cases where Python UDFs are used together with the RocksDB state backend in streaming or built-in batch algorithms in batch, the user can control how managed memory should be shared between data processing (RocksDB state backend or batch algorithms) and Python, by overwriting [managed memory consumer weights]({% link deployment/memory/mem_setup_tm.md %}#consumer-weights). 

#### FLIP-119 Pipelined Region Scheduling [FLINK-16430](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-16430)

> Beginning from Flink 1.12, jobs will be scheduled in the unit of pipelined regions. A pipelined region is a set of pipelined connected tasks. This means that, for streaming jobs which consist of multiple regions, it no longer waits for all tasks to acquire slots before starting to deploy tasks. Instead, any region can be deployed once it has acquired enough slots for within tasks. For batch jobs, tasks will not be assigned slots and get deployed individually. Instead, a task will be deployed together with all other tasks in the same region, once the region has acquired enough slots. 

Reviewer: I'd suggest to state that by setting `jobmanager.scheduler.scheduling-strategy: legacy` one can switch back to the legacy scheduling strategies in case problems arise.

* This will be replaced by the TOC
{:toc}

### APIs

#### Remove deprecated methods in ExecutionConfig [FLINK-19084](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-19084)

Deprecated method `ExecutionConfig#isLatencyTrackingEnabled` was removed, you can use `ExecutionConfig#getLatencyTrackingInterval` instead. 

Deprecated and methods without effect were removed: `ExecutionConfig#enable/disableSysoutLogging`, `ExecutionConfig#set/isFailTaskOnCheckpointError`.

Removed `-q` flag from cli. The option had no effect. 

#### Remove deprecated RuntimeContext#getAllAccumulators [FLINK-19032](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-19032)

The deprecated method `RuntimeContext#getAllAccumulators` was removed. Please use `RuntimeContext#getAccumulator` instead. 

#### Deprecated CheckpointConfig#setPreferCheckpointForRecovery due to risk of data loss [FLINK-20441](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-20441)

The `CheckpointConfig#setPreferCheckpointForRecovery` method has been deprecated, because preferring older checkpoints over newer savepoints for recovery can lead to data loss.

#### FLIP-134: Batch execution for the DataStream API

> - Allow explicitly configuring time behaviour on `KeyedStream.intervalJoin()` [FLINK-19032](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-19032)

Reviewer 4: I think the right link should be: https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-19479

> - Allow explicitly configuring time behaviour on `KeyedStream.intervalJoin()` [FLINK-19032](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-19032)

Author: Very good catch! Thank you!

  Before Flink 1.12 the `KeyedStream.intervalJoin()` operation was changing behavior based on the globally set Stream TimeCharacteristic. In Flink 1.12 we introduced explicit `inProcessingTime()` and `inEventTime()` methods on `IntervalJoin` and the join no longer changes behaviour based on the global characteristic. 

- Deprecate `timeWindow()` operations in DataStream API [FLINK-19318](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-19318)

>   In Flink 1.12 we deprecated the `timeWindow()` operations in the DataStream API. Please use `window(WindowAssigner)` with either a `TumblingEventTimeWindows`, `SlidingEventTimeWindows`, `TumblingProcessingTimeWindows`, or `SlidingProcessingTimeWindows`. For more information, see the deprecation description of `TimeCharacteristic`/`setStreamTimeCharacteristic`. 

Author: I assume this has been added because the deprecation of the timeWindow() is part of the time characteristic change, which is described in the deprecation description.

#### FLIP-119 Pipelined Region Scheduling [FLINK-16430](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-16430)

Beginning from Flink 1.12, jobs will be scheduled in the unit of pipelined regions. A pipelined region is a set of pipelined connected tasks. This means that, for streaming jobs which consist of multiple regions, it no longer waits for all tasks to acquire slots before starting to deploy tasks. Instead, any region can be deployed once it has acquired enough slots for within tasks. For batch jobs, tasks will not be assigned slots and get deployed individually. Instead, a task will be deployed together with all other tasks in the same region, once the region has acquired enough slots. 

The old scheduler can be enabled using the `jobmanager.scheduler.scheduling-strategy: legacy` setting.

> #### RocksDB optimizeForPointLookup results in missing time windows [FLINK-17800](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-17800)

Reviewer 5: This feature is first introduced in `1.11`, shall we still need to add this in `1.12-release notes`? The same to Chinese version.

By default we will set `setTotalOrderSeek` to true for RocksDB's `ReadOptions`, to prevent user from miss using `optimizeForPointLookup`. In the meantime we support customizing `ReadOptions` through `RocksDBOptionsFactory`. Please set `setTotalOrderSeek` back to false if any performance regressions are observed (this is not expected based on our testing). 

#### Custom OptionsFactory settings seem to have no effect on RocksDB [FLINK-18242](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-18242)

> 

Reviewer 5: This feature is first introduced in 1.11, shall we still need to add this in 1.12-release notes? The same to Chinese version.

Author: You are right, the feature has fix version 1.11.0 and 1.12.0, that's why it showed up here again. I removed it!

#### Upgrade Mesos version to 1.7 [FLINK-19783](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-19783)

The Mesos dependency has been bumped from 1.0.1 to 1.7.0. 

#### Send SIGKILL if Flink process doesn't stop after a timeout [FLINK-17470](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-17470)

In Flink 1.12 we changed the behavior of the standalone scripts to issue a SIGKILL if a SIGTERM did not succeed in shutting down a Flink process. 

#### Introduce non-blocking job submission [FLINK-16866](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-16866)

The semantics of submitting a job have slightly changed. The submission call returns almost immediately, with the job being in a new INITIALIZING state. Operations such as triggering a savepoint or retrieving the full job details are not available while the job is in that state. 
Once the JobManager for that job has been created, the job is in `CREATED` state and all calls are available. 

> ### Runtime

Reviewer 6: Shouldn't we add also new features like the UI update of [FLIP-102](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/FLINK/FLIP-102%3A+Add+More+Metrics+to+TaskManager) and [FLIP-104](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/FLINK/FLIP-104%3A+Add+More+Metrics+to+Jobmanager) to the release notes? If not, we, at least, should mention the newly introduced metrics for managed memory, network memory, and metaspace as we had questions about them popping up in the mailing list.

Author: I believe new features should be announced in the Release Announcement Blog Post, ideally with a link to the updated documentation.
These release notes are focusing on changes in APIs, semantics, configuration options etc.

#### FLIP-141: Intra-Slot Managed Memory Sharing

> The configuration `python.fn-execution.buffer.memory.size` and `python.fn-execution.framework.memory.size` have been removed and so will not take effect any more. Besides, the default value of `python.fn-execution.memory.managed` has been changed to true and so managed memory will be used by default for Python workers. In cases where Python UDFs are used together with RocksDB state backend in streaming or built-in batch algorithms in batch, the user can control how managed memory should be shared between data processing (RocksDB state backend or batch algorithms) and Python, by overwriting [managed memory consumer weights]({% link ops/memory/mem_setup_tm.md %}#consumer-weights). 

Reviewer 7: Maybe separate into 2 paragraphs.
```suggestion
The configuration `python.fn-execution.buffer.memory.size` and `python.fn-execution.framework.memory.size` have been removed and so will not take effect any more. Besides, the default value of `python.fn-execution.memory.managed` has been changed to true and so managed memory will be used by default for Python workers.

In cases where Python UDFs are used together with RocksDB state backend in streaming or built-in batch algorithms in batch, the user can control how managed memory should be shared between data processing (RocksDB state backend or batch algorithms) and Python, by overwriting [managed memory consumer weights]({% link ops/memory/mem_setup_tm.md %}#consumer-weights). 
```

The `flink-avro-confluent-schema-registry` module is no longer provided as a fat-jar. You should include its dependencies in your job's fat-jar. Sql-client users can use flink-sql-avro-confluent-schema-registry fat jar. 

#### Upgrade to Avro version 1.10.0 from 1.8.2 [FLINK-18192](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-18192)

The default version of Avro in flink-avro module was upgraded to 1.10. If for some reason you need an older version (you have Avro coming from Hadoop, or you use classes generated from an older Avro version), please explicitly downgrade the Avro version in your project. 

NOTE: We observed a decreased performance of the Avro 1.10 version compared to 1.8.2. If you are concerned with the performance and you are fine working with an older version of Avro, consider downgrading the Avro version. 

#### Create an uber jar when packaging flink-avro for sql client [FLINK-18802](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-18802)

The sql client jar was renamed to flink-sql-avro-{{site.version}}.jar, previously flink-avro-{{site.version}}-sql-jar.jar. Moreover it is no longer needed to add Avro dependencies manually. 

### Deployment

> #### Enable rolling in default log settings of standalone scripts [FLINK-8357](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-8357)

Reviewer 8: I am afraid not only the default log settings in standalone scripts has changed. But also the JobManager and TaskManager log settings in all other deployments(e.g. Yarn, K8s, etc.).
